# Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Foundations & Pre-processing
- **NGS VS Sanger Sequencing**
  
The key innovation that transforms DNA replication into the DNA-sequencing strategy at the core of both Sanger and NGS is the use of **unextendable, fluorescently labeled modified bases**. There are four different colors of modified bases for A, T, G, and C. In Sanger sequencing, only a small percentage of bases are modified (dideoxynucleotides, ddNTPs), whereas in Illumina´s techonologies, all available bases are modified with reversible 3´blockers. In both sequencing techniques, when polymerase incorporates a modified base into the copied strand, extension of the new strand stops and, critically, this newly terminated strand is uniquely colored to reflect its most recently added base.

The fundamental challenge for the sequencer, then, is to organize molecules such that their fluorescence signal is interpretable. In Sanger sequencing, an ensemble of DNA molecules — all originating from the same position on the template but having different size due to termination at different positions — are arranged in an electric field by capillary electrophoresis, which separates them by size because DNA is negatively charged. As the molecules migrate in the presence of the electric field, they flow past a detector that registers the fluorescence intensity and color, yielding a series of peaks that can be mapped directly to a DNA sequence.

While Sanger relies on physical separation by size, the leap to NGS was made possible by **massively parallel sequencing**, where millions of unique clusters are sequenced simultaneously on a solid surface (the flow cell).

-**Library Preparation**

Understanding the chemistry of reversible terminators explains how a single molecule is read. However, to achieve massively parallel sequencing, we must first transform raw biological samples (DNA or RNA) into a format the sequencer can recognize, capture, and amplify. This brings us to **library preparation**.

In the first step of library preparation, the DNA (or cDNA generated from retro-transcribed RNA) is cut in specified sizes through sonication or enzymatic digestion.

Next, small pieces of DNA, known as **adapters**, are added to the DNA. These fragments, specific for the different sequencers, contain the P5/P7 (flow cell binding, see below), priming sites and index/barcodes, and bind to the end of of the library´s DNA. This is the simplest workflow, mandatory for PCR-free protocols (e.g protocols that yield enough DNA that they do not require a PCR amplification step), but also more expensive and requires a different adapter for every single sample (since the index is already on the adapter).
However, the most common high-throughput method involves the use of truncated (stubby) adapters. These contain only the initial priming sites, and the library is "completed" during a subsequent indexed PCR step, where primers add the barcodes and the P5/P7 flow-cell binding sequences. If this PCR fails, then the sequencing will also fail, since the fragments won´t contain the P5/P7 needed for the binding.

In order for the adapters to bind to the DNA, a previous step of **end repair** is required, where all fragment ends are converted to blunt, by removing the 3´overhangs and filling in the 5´, and subsequently 5´phosphorylated. Finally, a single A is added to the 3´end of each fragment (**“A-tailling”**). Adapters, which contain a a complementary single 3′-T overhang, can now be added and bound to the fragments by a DNA ligase. T-A ligation is much more efficient than blunt-end, prevents the fragments from binding each other, which would create chimeras, and reduces (although doesn´t eliminate) adapter dimers. 
As we will see later, ATAC-seq uses tagmentation, so there´s no end-repair, A-tailing, or ligation. 

A crucial step in library prep is the selection of fragments of the right size. This is mainly done through the use of beads (AMPure XP). These beads are based on the **Solid Phase Reversible Immobilization (SPRI)**. They capture the DNA thanks to the presence of carboxyl groups and then are subjected to a polythynelglycol (PGE) and salt treatment. The idea is that bigger DNA molecules get released (precipitate) easier under this conditions. Depending on the desired size of the fragments, one or several clean-up steps can be performed with different concentrations of PEG/NaCl.

Lastly, in some protocols the library is amplified with a PCR step, to increase the concentration of DNA. In **PCR-free NGS protocols**, like whole genome-sequencing (WGS), we start with a much higher initial concentration of DNA (like 1 µg), so there is already enough material to be sequenced after adapter ligation. This has some advantages: PCR polymerases naturally "dislike" areas with high GC content (promoters) or high AT content. PCR-free sequencing provides the most even coverage across the entire genome because you remove the "enzyme preference" entirely. Additionally, PCR can sometimes introduce small insertions or deletions (stutter). PCR-free is superior for clinical variant calling. On the downside, PCR-free NGS protocols contain molecules with both, only one, or no adapters. This is because such adapters are used for library amplification in libraries that have a PCR step, so virtually all fragments will contain both adapters. However, in PCR-free protocols, the adapters are not used for amplification and there is no way to guarantee that all fragments will bind to both adapters. 


